## 2.11. Conditional Expressions

The statements
```c
    if (a > b) 
        z = a;
    else
        z = b;
```
compute in `z` the maximum of `a` and `b`. The conditional expression, written with the ternary operator `"?:"`,provides an alternate way to write this and similar constructions. In the expression
```c
    expr_1 ? expr_2 : expr_3;
```
the expression `expr_1` is evaluated first. If it is non-zero(true), then the expression `expr_2` is evaluated, and that is the value of the conditional expression. Otherwise `expr_3` is evaluated, and that is the value. Only one of `expr_2` and `expr_3` is evaluated. Thus to set `z` to the maximum of `a` and `b`,
```c
    z = (a > b) ? a : b; /* z = max(a, b) */
```
It should be noted that the conditional expression is indeed an expression, and it can be used wherever any other expression can be. If `expr_2` and `expr_3` are different types, the type of the result is determined by the conversion rules discussed earlier in this chapter. For example, if `f` is a `float` and `n` is an `int`, then the expression
```c
    (n > 0) ? f : n;
```
is of type `float` regardless of whether `n` is positive.

Parentheses are not necessary around the first expression of a conditional expression, since the precedence of `? :`is very low, just above assignment. They are advisable anyway, however, since they make the condition part of the expression easier to see.

The conditional expression often leads to succinct code. For example, this loop prints n elements of an array, 10 per line, with each column separated by one blank, and with each line (including the last) terminated by a newline.
```c
    for (i = 0; i < n; i++)
        printf( "%6d%c", a[i], (i%10==9 || i==n-1) ? '\n' : ' ');
```
A newline is printed after every tenth element, and after the `n`th. All other elements are followed by one blank. This might look tricky, but it's more compact than the equivalent `if`-`else`. Another good example is
```c
    printf("You have %d item%s.\n", n, n==1 ? "" : "s");
```

### Exercises
- **Exercise 2.10**: Rewrite the function `lower`, which converts upper case letters to lower case, with a conditional expression instead of `if`-`else`. 

