## 2.7. Type Conversions

When an operator has operands of different types, they are converted to a common type according to a small number of rules. In general, the only automatic conversions are those that convert a *"narrower"* operand into a *"wider"* one without losing information, such as converting an integer to floating point in an expression like `f + i`. Expressions that don't make sense, like using a `float` as a subscript, are disallowed. Expressions that might lose information, like assigning a longer integer type to a shorter, or a floating-point type to an integer, may draw a warning, but they are not illegal.

A `char` is just a small integer, so chars may be freely used in arithmetic expressions. This permits considerable flexibility in certain kinds of character transformations. One is exemplified by this naive implementation of the function `atoi`, which converts a string of digits into its numeric equivalent.
```c
/* atoi: convertstointeger */
int atoi(char s[])
{
    int i, n;
    n = 0;

    for (i = 0; s[i] >= '0' && s[i] <= '9'; ++i)
        n = 10 * n + (s[i] - '0'); 
    return n;
}
```
As we discussed in Chapter 1, the expression
```c
    s[i] - '0'
```
gives the numeric value of the character stored in `s[i]`, because the values of `'0'`, `'1'`, etc., form a contiguous increasing sequence.

Another example of `char` to `int` conversion is the function `lower`, which maps a single character to lower case for *the ASCII character set*. If the character is not an upper case letter, `lower` returns it unchanged.
```c
/* lower: convert c to lower case; ASCII only */
int lower(int c)
{
    if (c >= 'A' && c <= 'Z')
        return c + 'a' - 'A';
    else
        return c;
}
```
This works for ASCII because corresponding upper case and lower case letters are a fixed distance apart as numeric values and each alphabet is contiguous; there is nothing but letters between A and Z. This latter observation is not true of the EBCDIC character set, however, so this code would convert more than just letters in EBCDIC.

The standard header `<ctype.h>`, described in Appendix B, defines a family
of functions that provide tests and conversions that are independent of character set. For example, the function `tolower(c)` returns the lower case value of `c` if `c` is upper case, so `tolower` is a portable replacement for the function `lower` shown above. Similarly, the test
```c
      if (c >= '0' && c <= '9')
```
can be replaced by
```c
    isdigit(c)
```
We will use the `<ctype.h>` functions from now on.

There is one subtle point about the conversionof characters to integers. The
language does not specify whether variables of type char are signed or unsigned quantities. When a char is converted to an int, can it ever produce a negative integer? The answer varies from machine to machine, reflecting differences in architecture. On some machines a char whose leftmost bit is 1 will be converted to a negative integer ("sign extension"). On others, a char is promoted to an int by adding zeros at the left end, and thus is always positive.

The definition of C guarantees that any character in the machine's standard printing character set will never be negative, so these characters will always be positive quantities in expressions. But arbitrary bit patterns stored in 'character variables may appear to be negative on some machines, yet positive on others. For portability, specify signed or unsigned if non-character data is to be stored in char variables.

Relational expressions like `i > j` and logical expressions connected by `&&` and `||` are defined to have value `1` if true, and `0` if false. Thus the assignment
```c
    d = c >= '0' && c <= '9'
```
sets `d` to `1` if `c` is a digit, and `0` if not. However, functions like `isdigit` may return any non-zero value for true. In the test part of `if`, `while`, `for`, etc., *"true"* just means *"non-zero"*, so this makes no difference.

Implicit arithmetic conversions work much as expected. In general, if an operator like `+` or `*` that takes two operands (a binary operator) has operands of different types, the "lower" type is *promoted* to the "higher" type before the operation proceeds. The result is of the higher type. Section 6 of Appendix A states the conversion rules precisely. If there are no unsigned operands, however, the following informal set of rules will suffice:
- If either operand is `long double`, convert the other to `long double`. 
- Otherwise, if either operand is `double`, convert the other to `double`. 
- Otherwise, if either operand is `float`, convert the other to `float`. 
- Otherwise, convert `char` and `short` to `int`.
- Then, if either operand is `long`, convert the other to `long`.

Notice that `float`s in an expression are not automatically converted to `double`; this is a change from the original definition. In general, mathematical functions like those in `<math.h>` will use double precision. The main reason for using `float` is to save storage in large arrays, or, less often, to save time on machines where double-precision arithmetic is particularly expensive.

Conversion rules are more complicated when uns igned operands are involved. The problem is that comparisons between signed and unsigned values are "machine-dependent" because they depend on the sizes of the various integer types. For example, suppose that int is 16 bits and long is 32 bits. Then `-1L < 1U`, because `1U`, which is an `int`, is promoted to a `signed long`. But `-1L > 1UL`, because `-1L` is promoted to `unsigned long` and thus appears to be a large positive number.

Conversions take place across assignments; the value of the right side is converted to the type of the left, which is the type of the result. 
A character is converted to an integer, either by sign extension or not, as described above.

Longer integers are converted to shorter ones or to `chars` excess high-order bits. Thus in
```c
    int i; 
    char c;

    i = c; 
    c = i;
```
the value of `c` is unchanged. This is true whether or not sign extension is involved. Reversing the order of assignments might lose information, however.

If `x` is `float` and `i` is `int`, then `x = i` and `i = x` both causeconversions; `float` to `int` causes truncation of any fractional part. When `double` is converted to `float`, whether the value is rounded or truncated is implementation-dependent.

Since an argument of a function call is an expression, type conversions also take place when arguments are passed to functions. In the absence of a function prototype, `char` and `short` become `int`, and `float` becomes `double`. This is why we have declared function arguments to be `int` and `double` even when the function is called with `char` and `float`.

Finally, explicit type conversions can be forced (*coerced*) in any expression, with a unary operator called a *cast*. In the construction:
```c
    (type) expression
```
the *expression* is converted to the named type by the conversion rules above. The precise meaning of a cast is as if the *expression* were assigned to a variable of the specified type, which is then used in place of the whole construction. For example, the library routine `sqrt` expects a `double` argument, and will produce nonsense if inadvertently handed something else. (`sqrt` is declared in `<math•h>`). So if `n` is an integer, we can use
```c
    sqrt((double) n)
```
to convert the value of `n` to `double` before passing it to `sqrt`. Note that the cast produces the *value* of `n` in the proper type; `n` itself is not altered. The cast operator has the same high precedence as other unary operators, as summarized in the table at the end of this chapter.

If arguments are declared by a function prototype, as they normally should be, the declaration causes automatic coercion of any arguments when the function is called. Thus, given a function prototype for sqrt:
```c
    double sqrt(2);
```
the call
```c
    root2 = sqrt(2);
```
coerces the integer `2` into the `double` value `2.0` without any need for a cast.

The standard library includes a portable implementation of a pseudo-random number generator and a function for initializing the seed; the former illustrates a cast:
```c
unsigned long int next = 1

/* rand: return pseudo-random integer on 0..3276 */
int rand(void)
{
    next = next * 1103515245 + 12345;
    return (unsigned int)(next/65536) % 32768;
}

/* srand: set seed for rand() */
void srand(unsigned int seed)
{
    next = seed;
}
```

### Exercises
- **Exercise 2.3**: Write the function `htoi(s)`, which converts a string of hexadecimal digits (including an optional `Ox` or `ox`) into its equivalent integer value. The allowable digits are `0` through `9`, `a` through `f`, and `A` through `F`.

