## 2.9. Bitwise Operators

C provides six operators for bit manipulation; these may only be applied to integral operands, that is, `char`, `short`, `int`, and `long`, whether signed or unsigned.

| operator |       description        |
| :------: | ------------------------ |
|   `&`    | bitwise AND              |
|  &#124;  | bitwise inclusive OR     |
|   `^`    | bitwise exclusive OR     |
|   `<<`   | left shift               |
|   `>>`   | right shift              |
|   `-`    | one's complement (unary) |

The bitwise AND operator `&` is often used to mask off some set of bits; for example,
```c
    n = n & 0177;
```
sets to zero all but the low-order 7 bits of `n`.

The bitwise OR operator `|` is used to turn bits on:
```c
    x = x | SET_ON;
```
sets to one in `x` the bits that are set to one in `SET_ON`.

The bitwise exclusive OR operator `^` sets a one in each bit position where its operands have different bits, and zero where they are the same.

One must distinguish the bitwise operators `&` and `|` from the logical operators `&&` and `||`, which imply left-to-right evaluation of a truth value. For example, if `x` is `1` and `y` is `2`, then `x & y` is zero while `x && y` is one.

The shift operators `<<` and `>>` perform left and right shifts of their left operand by the number of bit positions given by the right operand, which must be positive. Thus `x << 2` shifts the value of `x` left by two positions, filling vacated bits with zero; this is equivalent to multiplication by 4. Right shifting an unsigned quantity always fills vacated bits with zero. Right shifting a signed quantity will fill with sign bits ("arithmetic shift") on some machines and with O-bits ("logical shift") on others.

The unary operator - yields the one's complement of an integer; that is, it converts each I-bit into a O-bit and vice versa. For example,
```c
    x = x & ~077
```
sets the last six bits of `x` to zero. Note that `x & ~077` is independent of word length, and is thus preferable to, for example, `x & 0177700`, which assumes that `x` is a 16-bit quantity. The portable form involves no extra cost, since `~077` is a constant expression that can be evaluated at compile time.

As an illustration of some of the bit operators, consider the function `getbits(x, p, n)` that returns the (right adjusted) `n`-bit field of `x` that begins at position `p`. We assume that bit position `0` is at the right end and that nand `p` are sensible positive values. For example, `getbits(x, 4, 3)` returns the three bits in bit positions 4, 3 and 2, right adjusted.
```c
/* getbits: get n bits from position p */
unsigned getbits(unsigned x, int p, int n)
{
    return (x >> (p+1-n)) & ~(~0 << n);
}
```
The expression `x >> (p+1-n)` moves the desired field to the right end of the word. `~0` is all 1-bits; shifting it left `n` bit positions with `~0 << n` places zeros in the rightmost `n` bits; complementing that with ~ makes a mask with ones in the rightmost `n` bits.

### Exercises
- **Exercise 2.6**: Write a function `setbits(x, p, n, y)` that returns `x` with the `n` bits that begin at position `p` set to the rightmost `n` bits of `y`, leaving the other bits unchanged.
- **Exercise 2.7**: Write a function `invert(x, p, n)` that returns `x` with the `n` bits that begin at position `p` inverted (i.e., I changed into 0 and vice versa), leaving the others unchanged.
- **Exercise 2.8**: Write a function `rightrot(x, n)` that returns the value of the integer `x` rotated to the right by `n` bit positions.

