## 2.2. Data Types and Sizes

There are only a few basic data types in C:

|          |                                                                                     |
| -------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `char`   | a single byte, capable of holding one character in the local character set          |
| `int`    | an integet, typicalllly reflecting the natural size of integers on the host machine |
| `float`  | single-precision floating point                                                     |
| `double` | double-precision floating point                                                     |

In addition, there are a number of qualifiers that can be applied to these basic types. `short` and `long` apply to integers:
```c
    short int sh;
    long int counter;
```
The word `int` can be omitted in such declarations, and typically is.

The intent is that `short` and `long` should provide different lengths of integers where practical; `int` will normally be the natural size for a particular machine. `short` is often 16 bits, `long` 32 bits, and `int` either 16 or 32 bits. Each compiler is free to choose appropriate sizes for its own hardware, subject
only to the restriction that `short`s and `int`s are at least 16 bits, `long`s are at least 32 bits, and `short` is no longer than `int`, which is no longer than `long`.

The qualifier `signed` or `unsigned` may be applied to `char` or any integer. `unsigned` numbers are always positive or zero, and obey the laws of arithmetic modulo $2^n$, where $n$ is the number of bits in the type. So, for instance, if `char`s are 8 bits, unsigned `char` variables have values between 0 and 255, while signed `chars` have values between `-128` and `127` (in a two's complement machine). Whether plain `char`s are signed or unsigned is machine-dependent, but printable characters are always positive.

The type `long double` specifies extended-precision floating point. As with integers, the sizes of floating-point objects are implementation-defined; `float`, `double` and `long double` could represent one, two or three distinct sizes.

The standard headers `<limits.h>` and `<float.h>` contain symbolic constants for all of these sizes, along with other properties of the machine and compiler. These are discussed in Appendix B.

### Exercises 

- **Exercise 2.1**: Write a program to determine the ranges of `char`, `short`, `int`, and `long` variables, both `signed` and `unsigned`, by printing appropriate values from standard headers and by direct computation. Harder if you compute them: determine the ranges of the various floating-point types.
