## 2.3. Constants

An integer constant like `1234` is an `int`. A `long` constant is written with a terminal `l` (ell) or `L`, as in `123456789L`; an integer too big to fit into an `int` will also be taken as a `long`. Unsigned constants are written with a terminal `u` or `U`, and the suffix `ul` or `UL` indicates `unsigned long`.

Floating-point constants contain a decimal point (`123.4`) or an exponent (`1e-2`) or both; their type is `double`, unless suffixed. The suffixes `f` or `F` indicate a `float` constant; `l` or `L` indicate a `long double`.

The value of an integer can be specified in octal or hexadecimal instead of decimal. A leading `0` (zero) on an integer constant means octal; a leading `Ox` or `ox` means hexadecimal. For example, decimal `31` can be written as `037` in octal and `Ox1f` or `OX1Fin` hex. Octal and hexadecimal constants may also be followed by `L` to make them `long` and `U` to make them `unsigned`: `OXFUL` is an `unsigned long` constant with value `15` decimal.

A *character constant* is an integer, written as one character within single quotes, such as `'x'`. The value of a character constant is the numeric value of the character in the machine's character set. For example, in the ASCII character set the character constant `'0'` has the value `48,` which is unrelated to the numeric value `0`. If we write `'0'` instead of a numeric value like `48` that depends on character set, the program is independent of the particular value and easier to read. Character constants participate in numeric operations just as any other integers, although they are most often used in comparisons with other characters.

Certain characters can be represented in character and string constants by *escape sequences* like `\n` (newline); these sequences look like two characters, but represent only one. In addition, an arbitrary byte-sized bit pattern can be specified by
```c
    '\000'
```
where *000* is one to three octal digits (0...7) or by
```c
    '\xhh'
```
where *hh* is one or more hexadecimal digits (0...9, a...f, A...F).  So we might write
```c
#define VTAB '\013' /* ASCII vertical tab */ 
#define BELL '\007' /* ASCII bell character */
```
or, in hexadecimal,
```c
#define VTAB '\xb' /* ASCII vertical tab */ 
#define BELL '\x7' /* ASCII bell character */
```
The complete set of escape sequences is

| escape sequence |         output         |
| --------------- | ---------------------- |
| `\a`            | alert (bell) character |
| `\b`            | backspace              |
| `\f`            | formfeed               |
| `\n`            | newline                |
| `\r`            | carriage return        |
| `\t`            | horizontal tab         |
| `\v`            | vertical tab           |
| `\\`            | backslash              |
| `\?`            | question mark          |
| `\'`            | single quote           |
| `\"`            | double quote           |
| `\000`          | octal number           |
| `\xhh`          | hexadecimal number     |

The character constant `'\0'` represents the character with value zero, the *null character*. `'\0'` is often written instead of `0` to emphasize the character nature of some expression, but the numeric value is just `0`.

A *constant expression* is an expression that involves only constants. Such expressions may be evaluated during compilation rather than run-time, and accordingly may be used in any place that a constant can occur, as in
```c
    "I am a string"
```
or
```c
    "" // the empty string
```

The quotes are not part of the string, but serve only to delimit it. The same escape sequences used in character constants apply in strings; `\"` represents the double-quote character. String constants can be concatenated at compile time:
```c
    "hello," " world"
```
is equivalent to
```c
    "hello, world"
```
This is useful for splitting long strings across several source lines.

Technically, a string constant is an array of characters. The internal representation of a string has a null character `'\0'` at the end, so the physical storage required is one more than the number of characters written between the quotes. This representation means that there is no limit to how long a string can be, but programs must scan a string completely to determine its length.
The standard library function `strlen(s)` returns the length of its character string argument `s`, excluding the terminal `'\0'`. Here is our version:
```c
/* strlen: return length of s */
int strlen(char s[])
{
    int i;

    i = 0;
    while(s[i] != '\0')
        ++i; 
    return i;
}
```
`strlen` and other string functions are declared in the standard header `<string.h>`.

Be careful to distinguish between a character constant and a string that contains a single character: `'x'` is not the same as `"x"`. The former is an integer, used to produce the numeric value of the letter *x* in the machine's character set. The latter is an array of characters that contains one character (the letter *x*) and a `'\0'`.

There is one other kind of constant, the *enumeration constant*. An enumeration is a list of constant integer values, as in
```c
    enum boolean { NO, YES };
```
The first name in an `enum` has value `0`, the next `1`, and so on, unless explicit values are specified. If not all values are specified, unspecified values continue the progression from the last specified value, as in the second of these examples:
```c
    enum escapes { 
        BELL = '\a',
        BACKSPACE = '\b',
        TAB = '\t',
        NEWLINE = '\n',
        VTAB = '\v',
        RETURN = '\r'
    };

    enum months { JAN = 1, FEB, MAR, APR, MAY, JUN, JUL, AUG, SEP, OCT, NOV, DEC };
    /* FEB is 2, MAR is 3, etc. */
```
Names in different enumerations must be distinct. Values need not be distinct in the same enumeration.

Enumerations provide a convenient way to associate constant values with names, an alternative to `#define` with the advantage that the values can be generated for you. Although variables of `enum` types may be declared, compilers need not check that what you store in such a variable is a valid value for the enumeration. Nevertheless, enumeration variables offer the chance of checking and so are often better than `#defines`. In addition, a debugger may be able to print values of enumeration variables in their symbolic form.
