## 2.8. Increment and Decrement Operators

C provides two unusual operators for incrementing and decrementing variables. The *increment* operator `++` adds 1 to its operand, while the *decrement* operator `--` subtracts 1. We have frequently used `++` to increment variables, as in
```c
    if (c == '\n')
```

The unusual aspect is that `++` and `--` may be used either as prefix operators (before the variable, as in `++n`), or postfix (after the variable: `n++`). In both cases, the effect is to increment `n`. But the expression `++n` increments `n` *before* its value is used, while `n++` increments `n` *after* its value has been used. This means that in a context where the value is being used, not just the effect, `++n` and `n++` are different. If `n` is `5`, then
```c
    x = n++;
```
sets `x` to `5`, but
```c
    x = ++n;
```
sets `x` to `6`. In both cases, `n` becomes `6`. The increment and decrement operators can only be applied to variables; an expression like `(i+j)++` is illegal.

In a context where no value is wanted, just the incrementing effect, as in
```c
    if (c == '\n')
        nl++;
```
prefix and postfix are the same. But there are situations where one or the other is specifically called for. For instance, consider the function `squeeze(S, C)`, which removes all occurrences of the character `c` from the string `s`.
```c
/* squeeze: delete all c from s */
void squeeze(char s[], int c)
{
    int i, j;

    for (i = j = 0; s[i] 1 = '\0'; i++) 
        if (s[i] 1 = c)
            s[j++] = s[i]; 
    s[j] = '\0';
}
```
Each time a non-`c` occurs, it is copied into the current `j` position, and only then is `j` incremented to be ready for the next character. This is exactly equivalent to
```c
    if (s[i] 1 = c) { 
        s[j] = s[i];
        j++;
    }
```

Another example of a similar construction comes from the `getine` function that we wrote in Chapter 1, where we can replace
```c
    if (c == '\n') { 
        s[i] = c;
        ++i;
    }
```
with the more compact
```c
    if (c == '\n')  
        s[i++] = c;
```

As a third example, consider the standard function `strcat(s, t)`, which concatenates the string `t` to the end of the string `s`. `strcat` assumes that there is enough space in `s` to hold the combination. As we have written it, `strcat` returns no value; the standard library version returns a pointer to the resulting string.
```c
/* strcat: concatenate t to end of s; s must be big enough */
void strcat(char s[], char t[])
{
    int i, j;

    i = j = 0;
    while (s[i] 1= '\0') /* find end of s */
        i++;
    while ((s[i++] = t[j++]) 1= '\0') /* copy t */
        ;
}
```
As each character is copied from `t` to `s`, the postfix `++` is applied to both `i` and `j` to make sure that they are in position for the next pass through the loop.

### Exercises
- **Exercise 2.4**: Write an alternate version of `squeeze(s1, s2)` that deletes each character in `s1` that matches any character in the string `s2`.
- **Exercise 2.5**: Write the function `any(s1, s2)`, which returns the first location in the string `s1` where any character from the string `s2` occurs, or `-1` if `s1` contains no characters from `s2`. (The standard library function `strpbrk` does the same job but returns a pointer to the location).

