## 1.7 Functions

In C, a function is equivalent to a subroutine or function in Fortran, or a procedure or function in Pascal. A function provides a convenient way to encapsulate some computation, which can then be used without worrying about its implementation. With properly designed functions, it is possible to ignore *how* a job is done; knowing *what* is done is sufficient. C makes the use of functions easy, convenient and efficient; you will often see a short function defined and called only once, just because it clarifies some piece of code.

So far we have used only functions like `printf`, `getchar`, and `putchar` that have been provided for us; now it's time to write a few of our own. Since C has no exponentiation operator like the `**` of Fortran, let us illustrate the mechanics of function definition by writing a function `power(m,n)` to raise an integer `m` to a positive integer power `n`. That is, the value of `power(2,5)` is `32`. This function is not a practical exponentiation routine, since it handles only positive powers of small integers, but it's good enough for illustration. (The standard library contains a function `pow(x, y)` that computes $x^Y$.)

Here is the function `power` and a main program to exercise it, so you can see the whole structure at once:
```c
// tcpl/ch1/power
#include <stdio.h>

int power(int m, int n)

/*test power function*/
main()
{
  int i;

  for (i = 0; i < 10; ++i)
      printf("%d %d %d\n", i, power(2,i), power(-3,i));
  return 0;
}

/* power: raise base to n-th power; n>= 0 */ 
int power(int base, int n)
{
  int i, p;
  p = 1 ;

  for (i = 1; i <= n; ++i)
      p = p * base; 
  return p;
}
```
A function definition has this form:
```
return-type function-name(parameter-declarations, if-any)
{
  declarations;

  statements;
}
```
Function definitions can appear in any order, and in one source file or several, although no function can be split between files. If the source program appears in several files, you may have to say more to compile and load it than if it all appears in one, but that is an operating system matter, not a language attribute. For the moment, we will assume that both functions are in the same file, so whatever you have learned about running C programs will still work.

The function `power` is called twice by `main`, in the line
```c
    printf("%d %d %d\n", i, power(2,i), power(-3,i));
```
Each call passes two arguments to `power`, which each time returns an integer to be formatted and printed. In an expression, `power(2, i)` is an integer just as `2` and `i` are. (Not all functions produce an integer value; we will take this up in Chapter 4.)

The first line of power itself,
```c
    int power(int base, int n)
```
declares the parameter types and names, and the type of the result that the function returns. The names used by `power` for its parameters are local to `power`, and are not visible to any other function: other routines can use the same names without conflict. This is also true of the variables `i` and `p`: the `i` in `power` is unrelated to the `i` in `main`.

We will generally use *parameter* for a variable named in the parenthesized list in a function definition, and *argument* for the value used in a call of the function. The terms *formal argument* and *actual argument* are sometimesused for the same distinction.

The value that `power` computes is returned to `main` by the `return` statement. Any expression may follow `return`:
```c
    return expression;
```

A function need not return a value; a `return` statement with no expression causes control, but no useful value, to be returned to the caller, as does "falling off the end" of a function by reaching the terminating right brace. And the calling function can ignore a value returned by a function.

You may have noticed that there is a `return` statement at the end of `main`. Since `main` is a function like any other, it may return a value to its caller, which is in effect the environment in which the program was executed. Typically, a return value of zero implies normal termination; non-zero values signal unusual or erroneous termination conditions. In the interests of simplicity, we have omitted `return` statements from our `main` functions up to this point, but we will include them hereafter, as a reminder that programs should return status to their environment.

The declaration
```c
    int power(int m, int m);
```
just before `main` says that `power` is a function that expects two `int` arguments and returns an `int`. This declaration, which is called a *function prototype*, has to agree with the definition and uses of `power`. It is an error if the definition of a function or any uses of it do not agree with its prototype.

Parameter names need not agree. Indeed, parameter names are optional in a function prototype, so for the prototype we could have written
```c
    int power(int, int);
```
Well-chosen names are good documentation, however, so we will often use them.

A note of history: The biggest change between ANSI C and earlier versions is how functions are declared and defined. In the original definition of C, the power function would have been written like this:
```c
/* power: raise base to n-th power; n>= 0 */
/*        (old-styleversion) */
power(base, n)
int base, n;
{
    int i, p;

    p = 1;
    for (i = 1; i <= n; ++i)
        p = p * base;
    return p;
}
```
The parameters are named between the parentheses, and their types are declared before the opening left brace; undeclared parameters are taken as into (The body of the function is the same as before.)

The declaration of `power` at the beginning of the program would have looked like this:
```c
    int power();
```
No parameter list was permitted, so the compiler could not readily check that `power` was being called correctly. Indeed, since by default `power` would have been assumed to return an `int`, the entire declaration might well have been omitted.

The new syntax of function prototypes makes it much easier for a compiler to detect errors in the number of arguments or their types. The old style of declaration and definition still works in ANSI C, at least for a transition period, but we strongly recommend that you use the new form when you have a compiler that supports it.

### Exercises
- **Exercise 1.5**: Modify the temperature conversion program to print the table in reverse order, that is, from 300 degrees to O.
