## 1.9 Character Arrays

The most common type of array in C is the array of characters. To illustrate the use of character arrays and functions to manipulate them, let's write a program that reads a set of text lines and prints the longest. The outline is simple enough:
```
  while (there's another line)
      if (it's longer than the previous longest)
          save it
          save its length 
  print longest line
```
This outline makes it clear that the program divides naturally into pieces. One piece gets a new line, another tests it, another saves it, and the rest controls the process.

Since things divide so nicely, it would be well to write them that way too. Accordingly, let us first write a separate function `getline` to fetch the next line of input. We will try to make the function useful in other contexts. At the minimum, `getline` has to return a signal about possible end of file; a more useful design would be to return the length of the line, or zero if end of file is encountered. Zero is an acceptable end-of-file return because it is never a valid line length. Every text line has at least one character; even a line containing only a newline has length 1.

When we find a line that is longer than the previous longest line, it must be saved somewhere. This suggests a second function, `copy`, to copy the new line

Finally, we need a `main` program to control `getline` and `copy`. Here is the result.
```c
#include <stdio.h>
#define MAXLINE 1000 /* maximum input line size */

int get_line(char line[], int maxline); // the name `getline` conflicts with the existing getline function and won't let this compile.
void copy(char to[], char from[]);

/* print longest input line */
int main(int argc , char* argv[])
{
    int len;               /* current line length */
    int max;               /* maximum length seen so far */
    char line[MAXLINE];    /* current input line */
    char longest[MAXLINE]; /* longest line saved here */

    max = 0;
    while((len = get_line(line, MAXLINE)) > 0)
        if (len > max) {
            max = len;
            copy(longest, line);
        }
    if (max > 0) /* there was a line */
        printf("%s", longest);
    return 0;
}

/* getline: read a line into s, return length */
int get_line(char s[], int lim)
{
    int c, i;

    for (i = 0; i<lim-1 && (c = getchar())!=EOF && c!='\n'; ++i)
        s[i] = c;
    if (c == '\n') {
        s[i] = c;
        ++i;
    }
    s[i] = '\0';
    return i;
}

/* copy: copy 'from' into 'to'; assume to is big enough */
void copy(char to[], char from[])
{
    int i;

    i = 0;
    while ((to[i] = from[i]) != '\0')
        ++i;
}
```
The functions `getline` and `copy` are declared at the beginning of the program, which we assume is contained in one file.

`main` and `getline` communicate through a pair of arguments and a returned value. In `getline`, the arguments are declared by the line
```c
    int get_line(char s[], int lim)
```
which specifies that the first argument, `s`, is an array, and the second, `lim`, is an integer. The purpose of supplying the size of an array in a declaration is to set aside storage. The length of the array s is not necessary in `getline` since its size is set in `main`. `getline` uses `return` to send a value back to the caller, just as the function `power` did. This line also declares that `getline` returns an `int`; since `int` is the default return type, it could be omitted.

Some functions return a useful value; others, like `copy`, are used only for their effect and return no value. The return type of copy is `void`, which states explicitly that no value is returned.

`getline` puts the character `'\0'` (the *null character*, whosevalue is zero) at the end of the array it is creating, to mark the end of the string of characters. This conventionis also used by the C language: when a string constant like
```c
  "hello\n"
```
appears in a C program, it is stored as an array of characters containing the characters of the string and terminated with a `'\0'` to mark the end.

| `h` | `e` | `l` | `l` | `o` | `\n` | `\0` |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | ---- | ---- |

The `%s` format specification in `printf` expects the corresponding argument to be a string represented in this form. `copy` also relies on the fact that its input argument is terminated by, `'\0'`, and it copies this character into the output argument. (All of this implies that `'\0'` is not a part of normal text.)

It is worth mentioning in passing that even a program as small as this one presents some sticky design problems. For example,what should `main` do if it encounters a line which is bigger than its limit? `getline` works safely, in that it stops collecting when the array is full, even if no newline has been seen. By testing the length and the last character returned, `main` can determine whether the line was too long, and then cope as it wishes. In the interests of brevity, we have ignored the issue.

There is no way for a user of `getline` to know in advance how long an input line might be, so `getline` checks for overflow. On the other hand, the user of `copy` already knows (or can find out) how big the strings are, so we have chosen not to add error checking to it.

### Exercises
- **Exercise 1-16**: Revise the `main` routine of the longest-line program so it will correctly print the length of arbitrarily long input lines, and as much as possible of the text.
- **Exercise 1.17**: Write a program to print all input lines that are longer than 80 characters.
- **Exercise 1.18**: Write a program to remove trailing blanks and tabs from each line of input, and to delete entirely blank lines.
- **Exercise 1.19**: Write a function `reverse(s)` that reverses the character string `s`. Use it to write a program that reverses its input a line at a time.
