## 3.2. If-Else

The `if`-`else` statement is used to express decisions. Formally, the syntax is
```c
    if (expression_1)
        statement_1
    else
        statement_2
```
where the `else` part is optional. The expression is evaluated; if it is true (that is, if `expression_1` has a non-zero value), `statement_1` is executed. If it is false (expression is zero) and if there is an else part, `statement_2` is executed instead.

Since an `if` simply tests the numeric value of an expression, certain coding shortcuts are possible. The most obvious is writing
```c
    if (expression)
```
instead of
```c
    if (expression != 0)
```
Sometimes this is natural and clear; at other times it can be cryptic.

Because the else part of an `if`-`else` is optional, there is an ambiguity when an `else` is omitted from a nested `if` sequence. This is resolved by associating the `else` with the closest previous `else`-less `if`. For example, in
```c
    if (n > 0)
        if (a > b)
            z = a;
        else
            z = b;
```
the `else` goes with the inner `if`, as we have shown by indentation. If that isn't what you want, braces must be used to force the proper association:
```c
    if (n > 0) {
        if (a > b)
            z = a;
    }
    else
        z = b;
```
The ambiguity is especially pernicious in situations like this:
```c
    if (n >= 0)
        for (i = 0; i < n; i++)
            if (s[i] > 0) {
                printf("...");
                return i;
            }
    else        /* WRONG */
      printf("error -- n is negative\n");
```
The indentation shows unequivocally what you want, but the compiler doesn't get the message, and associates the `else` with the inner `if`. This kind of bug can be hard to find; it's a good idea to use braces when there are nested `if`s.

By the way, notice that there is a semicolon after `z = a` in
```c
    if (a > b)
        z = a;
    else
        z = b;
```
This is because grammatically, a *statement* follows the `if`, and an expression statement like `z = a;` is always terminated by a semicolon.
