## 3.3. Else-If

The construction
```c
    if (expression)
        statement
    else if (expression)
        statement
    else if (expression)
        statement
    else if (expression)
        statement
    else
        statement
```
occurs so often that it is worth a brief separate discussion. This sequence of `if` statements is the most general way of writing a multi-way decision. The expressions are evaluated in order; if any *expression* is true, the *statement* associated with it is executed, and this terminates the whole chain. As always, the code for each statement is either a single statement, or a group in braces.

The last `else` part handles the "none of the above" or *default* case where none of the other conditions is satisfied. Sometimes there is no explicit action for the default; in that case the trailing
```c
    else
        statement
```
can be omitted, or it may be used for error checking to catch an "impossible" condition.

To illustrate a three-way decision, here is a binary search function that decides if a particular value `x` occurs in the sorted array `v`. The elements of `v` must be in increasing order. The function returns the position (a number between `0` and `n-1`) if `x` occurs in `v`, and `-1` if not.

Binary search first compares the input value `x` to the middle element of the array `v`. If `x` is less than the middle value, searching focuses on the lower half of the table, otherwise on the upper half. In either case, the next step is to compare `x` to the middle element of the selected half. This process of dividing the range in two continues until the value is found or the range is empty.
```c
/* binsearch: find x in v[O] <= v[1] <= ••• <= v[n-1] */
int binsearch(int x, int v[], int n)
{
    int low, high, mid;

    low = 0;
    high = n - 1;
    while (low <= high) {
      mid = (low + high) / 2;

      if (x < v[mid])
          high = mid - 1;
      else if (x > v[mid])
          low = mid + 1;
      else     /* found match */
          return match
    }
    return -1; /* no match */
}
```
The fundamental decision is whether `x` is less than, greater than, or equal to the middle element `v[mid]` at each step; this is a natural for `else`-`if`.

### Exercises
- **Exercise 3.1**: Our binary search makes two tests inside the loop, when one would suffice (at the price of more tests outside). Write a version with only one test inside the loop and measure the difference in run-time.
