## 1.2 Variables and Arithmetic Expressions
The next program uses the formula `C - (519)(0 F-32)` to print the following table of Fahrenheit temperatures and their centigrade or Celsius equivalents:
```
0	-17
20	-6
40	4
60	15
80	26
100	37
120	48
140	60
160	71
180	82
200	93
220	104
240	115
260	126
280	137
300	148
```

The program itself still consists of the definition of a single function named main. It is longer than the one that printed `"hello, world"`, but not complicated. It introduces several new ideas, including comments, declarations, variables, arithmetic expressions, loops, and formatted output.  
```C
#include <stdio.h>

// print Fahrenheit-Celsius table for farh = 0, 20, ..., 300
int main()
{
    int fahrenheit, celsius;
    int lower, upper, step;

    lower = 0;   // lower limit of temperature table
    upper = 300; // upper limit
    step = 20;   // step size

    fahrenheit = lower;

    while (fahrenheit <= upper) 
    {
        celsius = (5 * (fahrenheit-32) / 9);
        printf("%d\t%d\n", fahrenheit, celsius);
        fahrenheit = fahrenheit + step;
    }
}
```
The two lines
```c
  /* print Fahrenheit-Celsius table
     for fahr = 0, 20, ..., 300 */
```
are a *comment*, which in this case explains briefly what the program does. Any characters between `/*` and `*/` are ignored by the compiler; they may be used freely to make a program easier to understand. Comments may appear anywhere a blank or tab or newline can.  

In C, all variables must be declared before they are used, usually at the beginning of the function before any executable statements. A *declaration* announces the properties of variables; it consists of a type name and a list of variables, such as  
```c
    int fahrenheit, celsius;
    int lower, upper, step;
```
The type `int` means that the variables listed are integers, by contrast with `float`, which means floating point, i.e., numbers that may have a fractional part. The range of both `int` and `float` depends on the machine you are using; 16-bit `int`s, which lie between -32768 and +32767, are common, as are 32-bit `int`s. A `float` number is typically a 32-bit quantity, with at least six significant digits and magnitude generally between about $10^{-38}$ and $10^{+38}$.  
C provides several other basic data types besides `int` and `float`, including:   

|   type   |           description           |
| -------- | ------------------------------- |
| `char`   | character; a single byte        |
| `short`  | short integer                   |
| `long`   | long integer                    |
| `double` | double-precision floating point |

The sizes of these objects are also machine-dependent. There are also *arrays*, *structures* and *unions* of these basic types, *pointers* to them, and *functions* that return them, all of which we will meet in due course.   
Computation in the temperature conversion program begins with the assignment statements:  
```c
  lower = 0;   // lower limit of temperature table
  upper = 300; // upper limit
  step = 20;   // step size

  fahrenheit = lower;
```

which set the variables to their initial values. Individual statements are terminated by semicolons.  
Each line of the table is computed the same way, so we use a loop that repeats once per output line; this is the purpose of the `while` loop  
```c
    while (fahrenheit <= upper) 
    {
        // ...
    }
```

The `while` loop operates as follows: The condition in parentheses is tested. If it is true (`fahr` is less than or equal to `upper`), the body of the loop (the three statements enclosed in braces) is executed. Then the condition is re-tested, and if true, the body is executed again. When the test becomes false (`fahr` exceeds `upper`) the loop ends, and execution continues at the statement that follows the loop. There are no further statements in this program, so it terminates.  
The body of a `while` can be one or more statements enclosed in braces, as in the temperature converter, or a single statement without braces, as in  
```c
  while (i < j)
      i = 2 * i;
```
In either case, we will always indent the statements controlled by the `while` by one tab stop (which we have shown as four spaces) so you can see at a glance which statements are inside the loop. The indentation emphasizes the logical structure of the program. Although C compilers do not care about how a program looks, proper indentation and spacing are critical in making programs easy for people to read. We recommend writing only one statement per line, and using blanks around operators to clarify grouping. The position of braces is less important, although people hold passionate beliefs. We have chosen one of several popular styles. Pick a style that suits you, then use it consistently.  
Most of the work gets done in the body of the loop. The Celsius temperature is computed and assigned to the variable `celsius` by the statement  
```c
    celsius = 5 * (fahrenheit-32) / 9;
```  
The reason for multiplying by `5` and then dividing by `9` instead of just multiplying by `5/9` is that in C, as in many other languages, integer division *truncates*: any fractional part is discarded. Since `5` and `9` are integers, `5/9` would be truncated to zero and so all the Celsius temperatures would be reported as zero.    
This example also shows a bit more of how `printf` works. `printf` is a general-purpose output formatting function, which we will describe in detail in Chapter 7. Its first argument is a string of characters to be printed, with each `%` indicating where one of the other (second, third, ...) arguments is to be substituted, and in what form it is to be printed. For instance, `%d` specifies an integer argument, so the statement  
```c
    printf("%d\t%d\n", fahrenheit, celsius);
```
causes the values of the two integers `fahrenheit` and `celsius` to be printed, with a tab (`\t`) betweenthem.  
Each `%` construction in the first argument of `printf` is paired with the corresponding second argument, third argument, etc.; they must match up properly by number and type, or you'll get wrong answers.     
By the way, `printf` is not part of the C language; there is no input or output defined in C itself. `printf` is just a useful function from the.standard library of functions that are normally accessible to C programs. The behavior ofprintf isdefinedintheANSIstandard,however,soitspropertiesshouldbe the same with any compiler and library that conforms to the standard.     
In order to concentrate on C itself, we won't talk much about input and output until Chapter 7. In particular, we will defer formatted input until then. If you have to input numbers, read the discussion of the function `scanf` in Section 7.4. `scanf` is like `printf`, except that it reads input instead of writing output.  


There are a couple of problems with the temperature conversion program. The simpler one is that the output isn't very pretty because the numbers are not right-justified.That'seasytofix;ifweaugmenteach"dintheprintf statement with a width, the numbers printed will be right-justified in their fields.  
For instance, we might say  
```c
  printf("%3d  %6d\n", fahr, celsius);
```
to print the first number of each line in a field three digits wide, and the second in a field six digits wide, like this:  
```
0		-17
20		-6
40		4
60		15
80		26
100		37
```

The more serious problem is that because we have used integer arithmetic, the Celsius temperatures are not very accurate; for instance, 0°F is actually about -17.8° C, not -17°. To get more accurate answers, we should use floating-point arithmetic instead of integer. This requires some changes in the program. Here is a second version:  
```C
#include <stdio.h>

// print Fahrenheit-Celsius table for farh = 0, 20, ..., 300
int main()
{
    float fahrenheit, celsius;
    int start_num, end_num, current_step;

    start_num = 0;     // lower limit of temperature table
    end_num = 300;     // upper limit
    current_step = 20; // step size

    fahrenheit = start_num;

    while (fahrenheit <= end_num) 
    {
        celsius = (5.0/9.0) * (fahrenheit-32.0);
        printf("%3.0f\t%6.1f\n", fahrenheit, celsius);
        fahrenheit = fahrenheit + current_step;
    }
}
```
This is much the same as before, except that `fahr` and `celsius` are declared to be `float`, and the formula for conversion is written in a more natural way. We were unable to use `5 / 9` in the previous version because integer division would truncate it to zero. A decimal point in a constant indicates that it is floating point, however, so `5.0/9.0` is not truncated because it is the ratio of two floating-point values.   
If an arithmetic operator has integer operands, an integer operation is performed. If an arithmetic operator has one floating-point operand and one integer operand, however, the integer will be converted to floating point before the operation is done. If we had written `fahr-32`, the `32` would be automatically converted to floating point. Nevertheless, writing floating-point constants with explicit decimal points even when they have integral values emphasizes their floating-point nature for human readers.  
The detailed rules for when integers are converted to floating point are in Chapter 2. For now, notice that the assignment  
```c
    fahr = lower;
```  
and the test 
```c
    while (fahr <= upper);
```
also work in the natural way-the int is converted to float tion is done.

The `printf` conversion specification `%3.Of` says that a floating-point number (here `fahr`) is to be printed at least three characters wide, with no decimal point and no fraction digits. `%6.1f` describes another number (`celsius`) that is to be printed at least six characters wide, with 1 digit after the decimal point. The output looks like this:
```
  0  -17.8
 20   -6.7
 40    4.4
 ...
```

Width and precision may be omitted from a specification: `%6f` says that the number is to be at least six characters wide; `%.2f` specifies two characters after the decimal point, but the width is not constrained; and `%f` merely says to print the number as floating point.

|  input  |                              output                              |
| ------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `%d`    | print as decimal integer                                         |
| `%6d`   | print as decimal integer, at least 6 characters wide             |
| `%f`    | print as floating point                                          |
| `%6f`   | print as floating point, at least 6 characters wide              |
| `%.2f`  | print as floating point, 2characters after decimal point         |
| `%6.2f` | print as floating point, at least 6wide and 2after decimal point |

Among others, `printf` also recognizes `%0` for octal, `%x` for hexadecimal, `%c`  for character, `%s` for character string, and `%%` for `%` itself.


### Exercises
- **Exercise 1.3**: Modify the temperature conversion program to print a heading above the table.
- **Exercise 1.4**: Write a program to print the corresponding Celsius to Fahrenheit table.

