## 1.3 The For Statement

There are plenty of different ways to write a program for a particular task. Let's try a variation on the temperature converter.
```c
#include <stdio.h>

/* print Fahrenheit-Celsius table */
main()
{
    int fahr;
  
    for (fahr = 0; fahr < 300; fahr = (fahr + 20)) 
    {
        printf("%3d %6.1f\n", fahr, ((5.0/9.0)*(fahr-32))
    }
  
}
```
This produces the same answers, but it certainly looks different. One major change is the elimination of most of the variables; only fahr remains, and we have made it an into The lower and upper limits and the step size appear only as constants in the for statement, itself a new construction, and the expression that computes the Celsius temperature now appears as the third argument of printf instead of as a separate assignment statement.  
This last change is an instance of a general rule; in any context where it is permissible to use the value of a variable of some type, you can use a more complicated expression of that type. Since the third argument of `printf` must be a floating-point value to match the `%6.1f`, any floating-point expression can occur there.
The `for` statement is a loop, a generalization of the `while`. If you compare it to the earlier `while`, its operation should be clear. Within the parentheses, there are three parts, separated by semicolons. The first part, the *initialization*
```c
    fahr = 0
```
is done once, before the loop is entered. The second part is the test or *condition* that controls the loop
```c
    fahr <= 300
```
This condition is evaluated; if it is true, the body of the loop (here a single `printf`) is executed. Then the *increment* step  
```c
    fahr = fahr + 20
```
is executed, and the condition re-evaluated. The loop terminates if the condition has become false. As with the `while`, the body of the loop can be a single statement, or a group of statements enclosed in braces. The *initialization*, *condition*, and *increment* can be any expressions.  

The choice between `while` and `for` is arbitrary, based on which seems clearer. The `for` is usually appropriate for loops in which the initialization and increment are single statements and logically related, since it is more compact than `while` and it keeps the loop control statements together in one place.  

### Exercises
- **Exercise 1.5**: Modify the temperature conversion program to print the table in reverse order, that is, from 300 degrees to 0.

